Linux perf & allocation flame graph guides (#35)
swift-server/guides: docs/allocations.md

# Allocations

For high-performance software in Swift, it's often important to understand where your heap allocations are coming from. The next step can then be to reduce the number of allocations your software makes.

This is very similar to other performance questions: Before you can optimise performance you need to understand where you spend your resources. And resources can be CPU time, as well as memory, or heap allocations.
In this document we will solely focus on the number of heap allocations, not their size.

> On macOS, you can use Instrument's "Allocations" instrument. The Allocations instrument shows you two sets of values: The live allocations (ie. allocated and not freed) as well as the transient allocations (all allocations made).

Author: Yes! You can actually also create flame graphs this way from dtrace, so I could even make this a `perf|dtrace` -> `stackcollapse{-perf}.pl | flamegraph.pl` guide. WDYT?

> Your production workloads however will likely run on Linux and depending on your setup the number of allocations can differ significantly between macOS and Linux.

Author: Yes, I could do that, or have it work on Linux and macOS. WDYT is best?

> Your production workloads however will likely run on Linux and depending on your setup the number of allocations can differ significantly between macOS and Linux.

Reviewer: Including macOS as well would be great if it's not too much of an ask!

> Your production workloads however will likely run on Linux and depending on your setup the number of allocations can differ significantly between macOS and Linux.

Author: Should be fine. it's really easy, the biggest risk is that it may complicate the doc because there'll be two options for everything...

> Your production workloads however will likely run on Linux and depending on your setup the number of allocations can differ significantly between macOS and Linux.

Author: @glbrntt done

## Preparation

To not waste your time, be sure to do any profiling in _release mode_. Swift's optimiser will produce significantly faster code which will also allocate less in release mode. Usually this means you need to run

    swift run -c release
    
#### Install `perf`

Follow the [installation instructions](linux-perf.md) in the Linux `perf` utility guide.

#### Clone the `FlameGraph` project

> To see some pretty graphs, clone the [`FlameGraph`](https://github.com/brendangregg/FlameGraph) repository on the machine/container where you need it. The rest of this guide will assume that it's available at `/FlameGraph`:

Reviewer 2: Quite an aggressive assumed location.

Author: nice and short ;). Folks can always replace this with a real path, no? I do bind mount my flame graph checkout into `/FlameGraph` in all my containers :P

Author: I feel it didn't make much sense to come up with a certain path that is maybe more realistic because in the end, users will need to replace it with where they have it, right?

```
git clone https://github.com/brendangregg/FlameGraph
```

Tip: With Docker, you may want to bind mount the `FlameGraph` repository into the container using

```
docker run -it --rm \
           --privileged \
           -v "/path/to/FlameGraphOnYourMachine:/FlameGraph:ro" \
           -v "$PWD:PWD" -w "$PWD" \
           swift:latest
```

or similar.

## Tools

In this guide, we will be using the [Linux `perf`](https://perf.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/Main_Page) tool. If you're struggling to get `perf` to work, have a look at our [information regarding `perf`](linux-perf.md). If you're running in a Docker container, don't forget that you'll need a privileged container. And generally, you will need `root` access, so you may need to prefix the commands with `sudo`.

## Getting a `perf` user probe

In this guide, we will be counting the number of allocations. And the very most allocations from a Swift program (on Linux) will be done through the `malloc` function.

> To get information about how many times malloc is counted, we will install a `perf` "user probe" on the malloc function. From then on, there will be an event in `perf` that will fire whenever `malloc` is called.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To get information about how many times malloc is called, we will install a `perf` "user probe" on the malloc function. From then on, there will be an event in `perf` that will fire whenever `malloc` is called.
```

```

The result (hopefully) looks somewhat like this:

```
Added new event:
  probe_libc:malloc    (on malloc in /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libc-2.31.so)

You can now use it in all perf tools, such as:

	perf record -e probe_libc:malloc -aR sleep 1
```

What `perf` is telling you here is that it added a new event called `probe_libc:malloc` which will fire every time `malloc` is called.

Let's first of all confirm that our `probe_libc:malloc` probe actually works and run

    perf stat -e probe_libc:malloc -- bash -c 'echo Hello World'
    
which should output something like

```
Hello World

 Performance counter stats for 'bash -c echo Hello World':

              1021      probe_libc:malloc                                           

       0.003840500 seconds time elapsed

       0.000000000 seconds user
       0.003867000 seconds sys
```

Which seems to have allocated 1021 times, great. If that probe fired 0 times, something went wrong.

## Making pretty graphs

After we have confirmed that our user probe on `malloc` works in general, let's dial it up a little. The first thing we'll need is a program that we'd like to analyse the allocations of.

> For example, we could analyse a program which does 10 subsequent HTTP requests using [AsyncHTTPClient](https://github.com/swift-server/async-http-client). If you're interested in the full source code, please expand below.

Reviewer: I wonder if it would be more useful use a real(ish) example (like the `NIOSSLContext` allocations in AHC) so that you can break down the various parts like connection setup and different requests. That would be quite nice because it involves getting rid of the "noise" from arg parser etc. WDYT?

Author: @glbrntt Well, we need a "driver" program that does real. I kinda went with the simplest program that uses AHC to do 10 subsequent requests and incidentally this _is_ the program with which I found the `NIOSSLContext` allocs in AHC.

- `-m 50000`: The size of the ring buffer that `perf` uses to buffer. This is given in multiples of `PAGE_SIZE` (usually 4kB) and especially with DWARF this needs to be pretty huge to prevent data loss.
- `-e probe_libc:malloc`: Record when the `malloc` probe fires

What you want to see if output like this

```
<your program's output>
[ perf record: Woken up 2 times to write data ]
[ perf record: Captured and wrote 401.088 MB perf.data (49640 samples) ]
```

What you don't want to see is

```
[ perf record: Woken up 189 times to write data ]
Warning:
Processed 4346 events and lost 144 chunks!

Check IO/CPU overload!

[ perf record: Captured and wrote 30.868 MB perf.data (3817 samples) ]
```

When `perf` tells you that it lost a number of chunks it means that it lost data. If `perf` lost data, you have a few options:

- Reduce the amount of work your program is doing. For every allocation, `perf` will need to record a stack trace.

> - Reduce the maximum "stack dump" that `perf` records by changing the `--call-graph dwarf` parameter to for example `--call-graph dwarf,2048`. The default is to record a maximum of 4096 bytes which gives you pretty deep stacks, if you don't need that you can reduce the number. The tradeoff is that the flame graph may show you `[unknown]` stack frames which means that there are missing stack frames there. The unit is bytes.

Author: @glbrntt in AHC/gRPC 4096 was indeed not enough to get away with no `[unknown]`s. Having some chopped off `[unknown]`s isn't a huge deal but it makes analysis a little harder w.r.t. what thread they came from.

I can investigate if I can put the thread information in there separately from the call stack (so unknown's would be less bad). I'm pretty sure that's possible but haven't done it yet. I'll keep this comment open.

> - Reduce the maximum "stack dump" that `perf` records by changing the `--call-graph dwarf` parameter to for example `--call-graph dwarf,2048`. The default is to record a maximum of 4096 bytes which gives you pretty deep stacks, if you don't need that you can reduce the number. The tradeoff is that the flame graph may show you `[unknown]` stack frames which means that there are missing stack frames there. The unit is bytes.

Reviewer: Okay, I think this is fine as it is, I was just curious :)

- You can raise the number of the `-m` parameter which is the size of the ring buffer that `perf` uses in memory (in multiples of `PAGE_SIZE`, usually that is 4kB)
- You can give up nice call graphs and replace `--call-tree dwarf` with `--call-tree fp` (`fp` stands for frame pointer).

### Flame graphs

> After a successful `perf record`, you can invoke the following command line to produce an SVG file with the flame graph

Author: Good point. What would you think is a good intermediate step? Bother with `perf`s `perf report` TUI? Or say "this is how you can get an absolute number (`perf stat`) but wouldn't a Flame Graph be nice?" kind s thing?

> After a successful `perf record`, you can invoke the following command line to produce an SVG file with the flame graph

Reviewer: The latter, I think. Personally I've never had too much luck with `perf report`.

> After a successful `perf record`, you can invoke the following command line to produce an SVG file with the flame graph

Author: Cool, makes sense!

```bash
perf script | \
    /FlameGraph/stackcollapse-perf.pl - | \
    swift demangle --simplified | \
    /FlameGraph/flamegraph.pl --countname allocations \
        --width 2000 > out.svg
```

Let's expand a little on what the above command does:

> - It runs `perf script` which dumps the binary information that `perf record` recorded into a textual form.

Author: I went back and forth on that :). I left it out in the this version now because of these reasons:

- even more noise in the cmdline
- it's easy to accidentally `-i` an _old_ `perf.data.TIMESTAMP`
- progressive disclosure

I'm happy to change it again but I wasn't sure if this is necessary here. Tbh that's something I struggled with _a lot_: What to include and what to strip. Other examples:

- default stack shot size vs. 16384 or something else big
- flame _charts_ yes/no, I would've said yes but `stackcollapse-perf.pl` currently can't make them (have a patch)
- `perf` multi-output mode where you switch the output on a certain condition (like a signal or an event)
- the `| sed` stuff to simplify some stack traces (which I included)
- other stuff I now forgot

The truth is that `perf` is super powerful but it has a learning curve that I think is easy enough to overcome if you know what you're looking for but very hard to overcome if you don't. Terminology in the man pages etc and the extra complexity of a non-C language obviously add to that.

I'm very open to suggestions.

> - It runs `perf script` which dumps the binary information that `perf record` recorded into a textual form.

Reviewer: Oh I don't think it should be in all the examples here, but it's useful to know about, how about a note in "Other `perf` tricks"?

> - It runs `perf script` which dumps the binary information that `perf record` recorded into a textual form.

Reviewer: Flame charts would be useful too, I think.

- Next, we invoke `stackcollapse-perf` on it which transforms the stacks that `perf script` outputs into the right format for Flame Graphs,
- then we invoke `swift demangle --simplified` which will give us nice symbol names,
- and lastly we create the Flame Graph itself

After this command has run (which may run for a while), you should have an SVG file that you can open in your browser.

For the above example program, please see an example flame graph below. Note how you can hover over the stack frames and get more information. To focus on a sub tree, you can click any stack frame too.

Generally, in flame graphs, the X axis just means "count", it does not mean time. In other words, whether a stack appears on the left or the right is random and not determined when that stack was live (this is different in flame _charts_).

> Note that this flame graph is _not_ a CPU flame graph, 1 sample means 1 allocation here and not time spent on the CPU. Also be aware that stack frames that appear wide don't necessary allocate themselves, it means that they or something they call has allocated a lot. For example, `BaseSocketChannel.readable` is a very wide frame, and yet, it does not allocate itself. It however calls other functions (such as other parts of SwiftNIO and AsyncHTTPClient) that do then allocate a lot. It may take a little while to get familiar with flame graphs but there are great resources available online.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that this flame graph is _not_ a CPU flame graph, 1 sample means 1 allocation here and not time spent on the CPU. Also be aware that stack frames that appear wide don't necessarily allocate directly, it means that they or something they call has allocated a lot. For example, `BaseSocketChannel.readable` is a very wide frame, and yet, it is not a function which allocates directly. However, it calls other functions (such as other parts of SwiftNIO and AsyncHTTPClient) that do allocate a lot. It may take a little while to get familiar with flame graphs but there are great resources available online.
```

Reviewer: Maybe point to http://www.brendangregg.com/flamegraphs.html as a starting point for the available resources?

![](../images/perf-malloc-full.svg)

### Other `perf` tricks

#### Prettifying Swift's allocation pattern

Allocations in Swift usually have a very distinct shape:
 - Some code creates for example a class instance (which allocates).

>  - This calls `swift_allocObject`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - This calls `swift_allocObject`,
```

 - which calls `swift_slowAlloc`,
 - which calls `malloc` (where we have our probe).

To make our flame graphs look nicer, we can apply a small transformation after we have demangled the collapsed stacks:

```

>     sed -e 's/specialized //g' \
>         -e 's/;swift_allocObject;swift_slowAlloc;__libc_malloc/;A/g'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sed -e 's/specialized //g' \
    -e 's/;swift_allocObject;swift_slowAlloc;__libc_malloc/;A/g'
```
